db.info.insert(
    [
    {_id:"body",multi:"true", description:"Situated in Druid Lane, the Hall of the Red Earl is one of Galway\u2019s most important archaeological sites. It is associated with the establishment of the town of Galway by Anglo-Norman colonisers in the 13th century thus making it one of the oldest buildings in the city. It is named after Richard de Burgo, grandson of the town\u2019s founding father who as Baron of Connacht and Earl of Ulster was one of the most powerful Irish nobles of his time. Richard was also known as the Red Earl - most probably because of his red hair. The hall was a key municipal building and was used to collect taxes and dues and to dispense justice in the newly established town. Archaeological evidence shows that banquets were also held in the hall. It was the historic equivalent of a revenue office, courthouse, and town-hall rolled into one. "},
    {_id:"body1",multi:"true", description: "Entering the site it is easy to see the main walls including external buttresses. A row of octagonal limestone columns which helped to support the roof is also evident. Obvious too, is a cross-shaped figure which was actually an anvil base when iron-smelting works took places after the hall had been deserted by the de Burgos. As you can see from the Pictorial Map, the hall is certainly in a state of ruin by the middle of the 17th century. A good idea of what the original hall looked like can be viewed on the exhibition boards on site. The exact date the hall was abandoned is not certain but it is likely to have happened around the end of the 15th century. At this time the town was granted the right to elect its own mayor and the all-powerful De Burgo were voted out of power as well as out of the town! From this point on the other Anglo-Norman families - known as the Tribes of Galway- would share the position of Mayor of the town."},
    {_id:"body2",multi:"true", description:"Over the centuries, the hall became covered over but was rediscovered in the late 1990s when an extension was planned to the adjoining Revenue Commissioners Office. At this point, archaeologists unearthed over 11,000 artefacts from the site. Many of these, such as bone and pottery related to the use of the building as a banqueting hall. Some of the more interesting finds unearthed included a wine bottle, a gold cuff link and even part of a human skull! The Anglo-Norman Castle which supplanted the native Irish fort or d\u00fan was also partially excavated at this time. The rediscovery of the Red Earl\u2019s Hall led to a proposed extension to the adjacent Revenue Commissioners offices being completely redesigned to allow for the preservation of the archaeological site. Realising the immense importance of the hall, the offices were instead constructed by the OPW in bridge-like fashion overhead. Concrete and lead were utilised to imitate the stature of the archaeological site while the prominent buttresses of the hall were also replicated in the tasteful office design. Added to this, the hall was housed within glass panelling and a viewing gangway complete with flood-lighting was erected around it. Interpretive panels now explain the significance of the site and artefact replicas are prominently displayed. Today, Galway Civic Trust is delighted to present the site of \u2018The Hall of the Red Earl\u2019 to the general public."},
    {_id:"bodyBrowne",description:"Although the native Irish were largely kept outside the town, they did manage to influence the Anglo-Norman way of life within. So much so, that in 1527 a bye-law was passed forbidding the native game of hurling from being played on the Square. Today, banners featuring the names and coats of arms of the 14 Tribe families - Athy, Blake, Bodkin, Browne, D\u2019Arcy, Deane, Ffont, Ffrench, Joyce, Kirwan, Lynch, Martin, Morris and Skerrett \u2013 are often flown in the Square. The square\u2019s fountain, known as the Quincentennial Fountain, was installed in 1984 to mark the 500th anniversary of Galway receiving a mayoral charter."},
    {_id:"bodyBrowne1",description:"The Browne Doorway is a symbol of the wealth and fashion of the homes of the Tribe families during their rule over the medieval city. The family\u2019s mansion was originally located at Abbeygate Street Lower (known in medieval times as Skinner\u2019s Street) but by the start of the 20th century had fallen into ruin. In 1905, the Galway Archaeological and Historical Society saved the front of the building and had it relocated to Eyre Square. The decorated style of the structure hints at the riches and luxury which lay beyond this doorway. The Brownes were one of the later Tribe families to come to Galway but became quite influential, due in part, to their association with the powerful Lynch family. Indeed, on the doorway we can the arms of the Lynch family as well as the Browne\u2019s own crest of a two-headed eagle. Although the doorway has been somewhat weathered over the centuries it is still a telling reminder of the stately homes which were owned by Galway\u2019s medieval ruling classes. "},
    {_id:"bodyKing",description:"While the famous 17th century Pictorial Map of Galway depicts a three storey residence adjoining a five storey building known as Bank\u2019s Castle on the site of the present-day pub, archaeological evidence has shown, however, that a building probably existed there as far back as the 13th century. A number of features from the medieval building can still be seen in the premises. These include walls and windows while an impressive fireplace, which dates from 1612 and bears the family arms of three of the Tribe families greets customers on arrival. As suggested by the name, the building is famous for an association with the beheading of the king of England in 1649. Following the siege of Galway in 1652, it was seized by the notorious Cromwellian leader, Colonel Peter Stubbers from the mayor of Galway, Tom\u00e1s Lynch Fitz-Ambrose. Stubbers appointed himself as the town\u2019s military governor and according to legend, was equally feared and hated by the townspeople. Stubbers was involved in some way in the execution of King Charles I during England\u2019s bloody Civil War 1642-49 which pitted Cromwell\u2019s Parliamentarians against the monarchy. Some historians believe Stubbers wielded the axe which removed the King\u2019s head from his body, while others think he was instrumental in finding an Irish executioner named Richard Gunning to do the dirty work. In any case, following the restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660, Stubbers found himself a wanted man and made himself so scarce, he was never heard of again. Another interesting feature is located over the doorway of the building directly opposite The King\u2019s Head. Known as an armorial stone, this is a carving dating back to 1615 which bears the crests of the two tribe families - the Ffrenches and the Ffonts. Such stones were often carved to mark a marriage between Tribe families and typically carried the initials of the bride and groom. In this case AF and MF.  Indeed, it is well worth keeping a look out for various medieval insignias, plaques and architectural features on the city\u2019s buildings as you wander around. You\u2019re never too far away from one."},
    {_id:"bodyLynch",description:"The castle is located on the junction of Shop Street and Upper Abbeygate Street and is thought to date to the late 15th or early 16th century. The stylish carvings and architectural features on the castle are symbols of the wealth and influence of the Lynch family. In fact, this family held the office of Mayor of Galway on 84 occasions between the granting of mayoral status to the town in 1484 and the arrival of conquering Cromwellian forces in 1652."},
    {_id:"bodyLynch1",description:"19th century engraving of Lynch\u2019s Castle. On the castle front, facing towards Shop Street, there are two noticeable plaques. The circular one holds the Lynch coat of arms and has a biblical lion below it. The lower plaque bears the royal arms of Henry VII who came to the throne around the same time as the castle was being built. Below this is a rather unusual carving. According to local legend this is said to be an ape holding a child and comes from a story that during a fire in the castle, a pet ape rescued a child from its cradle and brought it to safety. Close to the top of the building is a line of plain and gargoyle waterspouts which used to throw off rainwater from the roof of the castle. Also on this side of the castle are decorative hood-mouldings over the windows while the original floor levels are indicated by the gun-loops on the corner of the castle. These defensive features show that the Lynch family was on guard against attack from either the native Irish outside the town walls or from rival merchant families within. "},
    {_id:"bodyLynch2",description:"Moving around to the Upper Abbeygate Street facade of the castle, a box-like projection known as a machicolation is the most obvious feature we see. It is thought that this construction would have protected an original doorway below, by allowing missiles to be dropped on any would-be attackers. Above this are two corbels which probably held a hoist or a bell.  Another family crest which can be seen here is that of the Fitzgerald family, who provided the Lynches with military support in the 16th century. Below this again is another biblical inscription in Latin from the Gospel of Luke. The foyer of the building can be visited during the bank\u2019s opening hours and is home to an exhibition of photos and information on the castle. A version of the Pictorial Map is also on display here."},
    {_id:"bodySparch", description:"Another section of the wall can be seen at one of Galway\u2019s best known landmarks, The Spanish Arch. The arch is actually a 16th century extension to the medieval city walls and was formerly known in Irish as Ceann an Bhalla or The Head of the Wall. It was originally built as a bastion to guard against foreign attack from the sea. It is only in recent times the arch was cut through and was named in honour of the many Spanish galleons which off-loaded their wares at the medieval harbour. It is certainly worth walking through the arch where you will find a good section of the original line of town walls to the rear."},
    {_id:"bodySt", description:"The church was built in 1320, probably on the site of an earlier church, and is located just off the western end of Shop Street. The church is dedicated to St Nicholas who was more commonly associated as the patron saint of sailors in medieval times but is probably best known as \u2018Santa Claus\u2019 today. Numerous churches in seaport towns such as Galway are dedicated to the saint. One particularly famous sailor is thought to have worshipped at the church: in 1477 Christopher Columbus paid a visit to Galway. The church was originally linked to a Cistercian order but gained \u2018collegiate\u2019 status when the town received its royal charter in 1484. This meant that it was then run by a \u2018college\u2019 of 8 vicars and a warden who were accountable directly to the Pope.  During 16th and 17th centuries the church swung between the Catholic and Protestant faiths. In the years after the sacking of the town by Cromwellian forces in 1652, however, the church fell firmly under the control of new Protestant settlers. Today it continues to operate under the auspices of the Anglican Church of Ireland."},
    {_id:"bodySt2", description:"The church was originally built to a traditional cross shape plan the 14th century. As the wealthy Tribe families competed to add extensions to it however, it ended up with the unusual triple-gable profile which we can see from the car-park end of the church as well as on the Pictorial Map. Outside the church we can also see mermaid carvings on the windows at this end of the church while high above the entrance are a line of wonderful gargoyles which at one time threw off water from the roof. Entering into the church, the first medieval feature to meet us is the beautifully carved stepped baptismal font which dates to the late 16th or early 17th century. From here we can move across the nave into the north aisle where it is worth searching for a number of \u2018vocational stones\u2019 on the ground outside the small side chapel. These are gravestones into which are carved the emblem of the deceased\u2019s profession. Look carefully and you will find   three crowned hammers \u2013 the marks of a goldsmith.  Other vocational stones in this aisle are those of a carpenter, a cooper, a tailor and a wool merchant. Close by is a holy water stoup or \u2018benitier\u2019 decorated with carved vine leaves which dates to the late 15th or early 16th centuries. "},
    {_id:"bodySt3", description:"Moving into the central \u2018crossing\u2019 area, see if you can spot a small but wonderfully carved \u2018manticore\u2019 above the pulpit.  This symbol of the devil has the head of a man and the body of lion and was used to strike fear into medieval churchgoers. From here, we can now step into the chancel, one of the oldest parts of the building and thought to be part of the original church pre-dating 1320. You can now move into the Lynch transept which is named after the powerful Tribe family who sponsored this extension in the 16th century.  Looking to the left we can see the small \u2018Chapel of Christ\u2019 which contains a coffin-shaped grave slab decorated with crosses. This is the oldest monument in the church and according to legend is the tomb of crusader. Next to this is the \u2018Lynch Window\u2019 which is also a tomb, this one dedicated to Stephen Lynch, a military leader. Either side of this window is the Lynch family crest of a chevron between three clover leaves. The window also holds two angel figures which were originally candle bearers. These beautiful carvings along with a number of others were destroyed by the Cromwellian forces that used the church as a stable after they gained entry to the town in 1652."},
    {_id:"bodySt4", description:"There are two other tombs in this transept, also dedicated to Lynch family members. One is an altar-tomb which includes a magnificent canopy with flame-like tracery and a carving of Christ displaying the five wounds. The other is a chest-tomb in the corner of the transept which is falsely claimed to be that of a 15th century Mayor of Galway who is reputed to have hung his son in 1493. According to a popular but unproven local legend, James Lynch Fitzstephen executed his son Walter for the killing of young Spanish merchant who had taken an interest in Walter\u2019s wife while on a visit to Galway. This tale became such a part of the town\u2019s folklore that a memorial was erected just outside the church grounds in Market Street in 1854 to commemorate the \u2018stern and unbending justice\u2019 of Mayor Lynch \u2018who condemned and hung his own guilty son Walter on this spot\u2019! When leaving the transept, see if you can find a carving of angel high up on one of the archways at the junction of south aisle. This is said to be the only example in the church which has not been defaced. Stepping back into the south aisle, note a pillar that differs from the two to the left. This concave-styled support is commonly referred to as \u2018The Apprentice\u2019s Column\u2019, owing to the tradition that it was produced by medieval apprentice craftsman as his graduating work of art. We know find ourselves back at the door through which you entered the church and this completes our tour of St Nicholas\u2019 Collegiate Church."},
    {_id:"bodyWall", description:"This section of the town walls was discovered between the remains of two medieval defences known as Shoemaker\u2019s and Penrice\u2019s Towers during the development of the Eyre Square Shopping Centre in the 1980s. Both the walls and the towers were reconstructed on their original bases and can be viewed in the centre today during opening hours. The building of the city walls began in 1270 under Walter de Burgo \u2013 son of the town\u2019s founder, Richard. Over time the walls came to enclose the town of Galway which comprised an area of about 11 hectares. The citizens of Galway were charged a tax known as \u2018murage\u2019 to pay for the building and maintenance of the walls. During periods when the town was on alert of attack, extra defences were added along their lines. This threat became a reality when \u2018Red\u2019 Hugh O\u2019Donnell from Donegal led an attack on the town as part of native Irish rebellion against Englishoccupation in Ireland in 1597. Much to the relief of the townspeople, however, the sturdy walls prevented his army from making it into the town. By 1643, the people of Galway were demanding a greater degree of control over their own affairs, and, as such, managed to expel the crown forces from the town. Expecting a wave of revenge, the citizens added further fortifications along the walls. The revenge eventually came in the form of an invading Cromwellian army who laid siege to the town in 1651 and eventually forced the inhabitants into submission through starvation. "},
    {_id:"descBrowne", description:"Eyre Square is perhaps Galway\u2019s most famous landmark. In medieval times it was known simply as \u2018The Green\u2019, and was designed as an open area in front of the main gateway to the town where potential attackers on the city would find little cover. As evidenced in the Pictorial Map, the area was also used by the town\u2019s army as a location for tournaments and military training."},
    {_id:"descKing", description:"The King\u2019s Head is located on High Street (known as Gaol Street in medieval times) and is one of Galway\u2019s best known pubs. There is a long-standing local tradition that the building which houses the pub was strongly associated with the executioner of King Charles I in 1649."},
    {_id:"descLynch", description:"Lynch\u2019s Castle is the finest surviving example of an urban tower-house in Ireland and is the oldest building in continuing commercial use in Ireland. It was home to the most powerful of the Tribe families of Galway and is situated at the very centre of the old medieval town."},
    {_id:"descSt", description:"St Nicholas\u2019 Church is the largest medieval church in constant use in Ireland and retains some wonderful features from that period. Dedicated to St Nicholas, the patron saint of sailors, it was visited from no less a sea-farer than Christopher Columbus who stopped by to say a few prayers in 1477."},
    {_id:"descWall", description:"The final location on the Galway Medieval Walk is a section of the old town walls which are located inside a modern day shopping centre. The walls were designed to provide security for the Anglo-Norman townspeople from the outside world. "},
    {_id:"introduction", description:"As one of the oldest sites in the medieval town of Galway, the Hall of the Red Earl is associated with the De Burgo family who founded the town in the 13th century. Within its walls, banquets were hosted, taxes were collected and justice was dispensed."}
    ]
)